>> Anjana Vakil: Our next task is going
to be to write a function called pipe,
which is a common functional
programming utility.
That we could import from a different
library, but we're not gonna,
we're gonna make it.
That is going to take a bunch
of different functions,
however many I want, and
it's going to compose them
together
>> Anjana Vakil: Into a single
function where I don't have to nest
the calls in a backwards order.
So basically, this utility is going
to allow me to write code left to
right that says stuff like, okay,
first join these values together,
and then split up that return value,
and then reverse that.
For example, these are just simple string
manipulations, or array manipulations.
And this is gonna help us not have
to do that mental gymnastics of
reversing the order of operations
in our heads every time.
So this is a very handy utility in
the functional program or toolbox,
is a pipe or pipeline function that takes
a bunch of functions in as arguments and
returns the composition in
the order you would expect.
So that is started out for
you here in funpro.js,
a new addition to our toolkit here.
We still have filter, we have map, we have
reduce, we have all of our little helpers.
And what we're gonna do is use all
of the tools we have accumulated so
far to implement this pipe function so
that we don't have to keep doing that,
and exclaim, and then announce,
and then [INAUDIBLE].
So that we can just write code more
like we would express it verbally.
It's gonna need recursion.
There's some notes in here about
what you're gonna wanna do.
>> Anjana Vakil: Let's have at it.
>> Anjana Vakil: Let's make a pipeliner.
[LAUGH] So,
I added a few hints in the comments, and
in this little purple box thingy.
Again, we are recursing all the way down,
and we are using those
little array helpers just
to practice the functional principles.
And there's one other thing that
might become useful for this,
which is the spread of an array.
So the thing is, the pipe function
is not taking in an array,
it's taking in a bunch of comma-separated
arguments, each of which is a function.
So we don't know how many, pipe should
work with any number of functions.
It should be able to take in as
many arguments as we want, and so
the spread operator is a handy way
of taking as many arguments as
pipe received and
capturing them as this funds array.
And then we can also use spread
to expand an array if we need to.
And if you haven't worked with spread
operators much, totally chill,
there's also other ways to do this.
And if you're curious about them,
MDN them.
All right, base cases,
good place to start.
So, zero functions, our pipeline is done.
Which do we return, however?
Pipe always needs to return a function.
So in this case, we can return what
I've called the identity function, but
basically, a no op function, a function
that does nothing [LAUGH] to its input.
It still has to be a function, though.
And this is gonna be in our base
case where, if we have no functions,
so if our little length helper of fns,
and fns here is an array of
all of the function arguments
that were passed in to pipe.
If the length is 0, then we will return
a function that essentially
takes in whatever
input we give it and
spits it right back out.
Does nothing.
But we need a base case,
so, good starting point.
Sound okay?
All right, second base case.
If there's one function, so,
if (length(fns) == 1),
then what do we want to return?
Well, we wanna return a function.
So I'm just gonna put an arrow
here to remind us to do that.
And what?
>> Anjana Vakil: Well, there's a couple
different ways we could write this that
don't all involve that.
What would we like to return here?
>> Anjana Vakil: So, if I give it
an input, this returned function,
the output that I want is?
>> Speaker 2: The first function of input,
the head.
>> Speaker 3: Calling that
function with that input.
>> Anjana Vakil: Passing
that input to this function.
So one way I could write this,
to be super explicit,
could be that we take the head of fns,
and then, and
this is where we're starting to
get into more functioning syntax.
Head of fns is a fun,
[LAUGH] it's a function.
So that means I can open some parens
to call it on the input, okay?
But there's an even shorter
way I could have written this,
which is that I could
just return the function,
cuz that's already what
this function does.
It takes an input and
it does its operation on the input, right?
So either way, totally legit, equivalent.
All right, base cases sorted,
now all we need to do is draw
the rest of the recursion.
So, as I've mentioned in
the comment right here,
if we have multiple functions,
we're going to apply the first one,
or call it,
>> Anjana Vakil: And
then,
>> Anjana Vakil: Pipeline
it through another pipeline that's
all the rest of the function.
Let's put that into code.
There's gonna be some parentheses,
but we will get through it.
All right, so
I'm still gonna return a function, and
that function is gonna take in whatever
input, just like the other cases.
We're always returning a function that
takes input and returns output, right?
So we're taking in this function
that returns something,
and is going to involve a call to pipe.
[LAUGH] All right,
now we said, we wanna create
a recursive pipeline of
the rest of the functions.
Can anybody help me tell
JavaScript to do that?
>> Speaker 4: We need a tail.
>> Anjana Vakil: Tail, right?
So the counterpart to head,
we're gonna work with the tail of the fns.
And then the thing is, the tail method or
function-
>> Speaker 5: Turns an array.
>> Anjana Vakil: It's actually
an array when it comes back.
So this is gonna be an array of functions.
>> Speaker 6: So we gotta spread it.
>> Anjana Vakil: But pipe doesn't
take an array of functions, so
one thing we can do, and this is where
that spread operator is helpful.
We can take whatever the things are in
this array and spread them out,
sort of unwrap them from the array and
pass them in as arguments.
So this would be sort of
equivalent to passing in each
of the elements in the array
with commas between them.
>> Anjana Vakil: However, we are not done,
because this neglects our good friend,
the head function, the first function.
>> Anjana Vakil: And this is where
the mental gymnastics start happening.
So, pipeline returns a function.
>> Anjana Vakil: And that function,
>> Anjana Vakil: If we go back to our
>> Anjana Vakil: Graphic here, right?
>> Anjana Vakil: Which do
we want to apply first?
The f function or the g function?
So, in our case, the head, or
all the rest of the pipeline?
But whatever input we're passing to
this pipeline, the first function
we wanna pass it through is the first
function passed in as an argument to pipe.
So that means, if we're listing these in,
we're writing this for ourselves,
to be able to stop thinking about what
order these functions are executed in.
We wanna be able to pass in f and then g
and still get out the correct application.
So in this case,
>> Anjana Vakil: The first
thing we wanna do is, similarly to before,
we wanna take the head function and
call it on the input, right?
And so
before we had this head input signature,
like that, we're gonna do that.
And that, if I just say,
>> Anjana Vakil: We
don't have to do this with a variable.
But if I say pipe first is the head
of the funds applied to the input,
which doesn't make sense cuz we're not
in the body of the function here, but
you know what I mean.
Imagine we had curly braces, okay?
And we want to take that.
That is essentially,
our green triangle here.
That's the first output.
And we wanna take that and
pass it into the rest of the pipeline.
Help me get my parentheses
in the right places, please.
Where should I put this little
snippet of code right here?
This head(fns)(input).
Now, that's the first thing that I
want to happen in the execution,
which means it's probably
gonna be- The last.
Backwards in our calling of it.
So this is gonna be that first output.
And we wanna pass that in to
the rest of the pipeline,
which means we need more, close paren,
open paren, and then the output value,
whatever the result is of calling
the first function in fns.
On whatever input we had piped in,
that whole thing is
essentially like the first
function output, and
that is then gonna be the input that
we pass to our recursive pipeline.
Let's take a look at what's
happening in our tests.
We now have a way of left to right piping
a bunch of different functions, composing
them together so that we don't have to
think about the order of operations.
And so there's,
the last test in this test suite is
double checking that we are doing that.
So for example,
here I have this super useful function.
We We have a bunch of little functions
that are all doing one thing.
So we have a reverse,
that reverses an array.
We have a join, that concatenates all of
the values in array into a single string.
And then we have a split, that splits
a string into individual characters.
And we are double checking
that our pipeline is applying
the functions in the correct,
intended order,
by making sure that we're getting
different results out, okay?
So here what we're doing,
is if we're reversing and then joining and
then splitting, we're taking the array,
pipes are cool,
reversing it into the array,
cool are pipes.
Joining that all together into,
cooler pipes of string, and then splitting
that up into individual characters,
to get cooler pipes in an array.
And that is not the same thing as if
we took that exact same input and
put it through a differently
ordered pipeline, where here,
first we're smooshing
particle into one string.
And then we are splitting
it up into a bunch of,
that's our cool letters, and
then we are into an array, and
then we are reversing that array and
getting, look at us poop.
[LAUGH] So, this is just a test to again,
prove to ourselves
that we have now sort of hoisted
ourselves by our own functional
bootstraps into being able to
use a more human readable.
But still purely functional
way of chaining inputs through
pipelines of multiple functions.
Well, rather, of creating that pipeline,
which itself, is a single function.
So now we've got this pipeline, it's like
this one big black box that we don't have
to do any mental gymnastics to call the
functions, nest them in the correct way.
And now we have a function that
takes in our original input and
performs all of the transformations we
want, and gets our ultimate output.